Data has a life cycle of its own too.The life cycle of data consists of following  plan, capture, manage, analyze, archive and destroy.:- 
    i-Planning : Decide what kind of data is needed, how it will be managed, and who will be responsible for it.
    ii-Capture : Collect or bring in data from a variety of different sources.
    iii-Manage : Care for and maintain the data. This includes determining how and where it is stored and the tools used to do so.
    iv-Analyze : Use the data to solve problems, make decisions, and support business goals.
    v-Archive : Keep relevant data stored for long-term and future reference.
    vi-Destroy : Remove data from storage and delete any shared copies of the data.

    //Data copied from coursera is below

Variations of the data life cycle
You have learned that there are six stages to the data life cycle. Here's a recap:

Plan: Decide what kind of data is needed, how it will be managed, and who will be responsible for it.

Capture: Collect or bring in data from a variety of different sources.

Manage: Care for and maintain the data. This includes determining how and where it is stored and the tools used to do so.

Analyze: Use the data to solve problems, make decisions, and support business goals.

Archive: Keep relevant data stored for long-term and future reference.

Destroy: Remove data from storage and delete any shared copies of the data.

Note: Be careful not to confuse the six stages of the data life cycle (plan, capture, manage, analyze, archive, and destroy) with the six phases of the data analysis process (ask, prepare, process, analyze, share, and act). They are not interchangeable.

The data life cycle provides a generic or common framework for how data is managed. You may recall that variations of the data analysis life cycle were described in 
Origins of the data analysis process
. The same can be done for the data life cycle. The rest of this reading provides a glimpse of how government, finance, and education institutions can view data life cycles a little differently.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service uses the following data life cycle:

Plan

Acquire

Maintain

Access 

Evaluate

Archive

For more information, refer to 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife's Data Management Life Cycle
 page.

The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
The USGS uses the data life cycle below:

Plan

Acquire

Process

Analyze

Preserve

Publish/share

Several cross-cutting or overarching activities are also performed during each stage of their life cycle:

Describe (metadata and documentation)

Manage quality

Backup and secure

For more information, refer to the 
USGS Data Lifecycle
 page.

Financial institutions
Financial institutions may take a slightly different approach to the data life cycle as described in 
The Data Life Cycle
, an article in Strategic Finance magazine:

Capture

Qualify

Transform

Utilize

Report

Archive

Purge

Harvard Business School (HBS)
One final data life cycle informed by Harvard University research has eight stages:

Generation

Collection

Processing

Storage 

Management

Analysis

Visualization

Interpretation


Key takeaways
Understanding the importance of the data life cycle will set you up for success as a data analyst. Individual stages in the data life cycle will vary from company to company or by industry or sector. Historical data is important to both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the USGS, so their data life cycle focuses on archiving and backing up data. Harvard's interests are in research and teaching, so its data life cycle includes visualization and interpretation even though these are more often associated with a data analysis life cycle. The HBS data life cycle also doesn't call out a stage for purging or destroying data. In contrast, the data life cycle for finance clearly identifies archive and purge stages. To sum it up, although data life cycles vary, one data management principle is universal: Govern how data is handled so that it is accurate, secure, and available to meet your organization's needs.


